# Introduction

Toedi is a self-hosted fitness tracking app. It is mostly aimed at endurance 
training, though should be useful for any kind of training. It can import 
workout data, show you past workouts, show metrics ant statistics for your 
training and comes with a powerful workout planner.

The motivation for creating Toedi was having control of your own data and being 
able to have metrics that are actually relevant to you. As I'm mostly training 
for mountaineering, expect mostly metrics related to mountain sports, though I 
want this to be configurable and welcome having additional metrics for other 
sports as well. Another big motivation is being able to easily create a 
training plan for two or more months without tediously creating entries for 
each day, and without cursing yourself if you evenr need to modify a training 
plan later on. The aim here is to need no more than 15 minutes to create a 2 
month training plan and to easily adapt it when circumstances and goals change.

The name Toedi comes from a swiss mountain, TÃ¶di, which is only 3600m above 
sea level and not particularly challenging. My dad once climbed it when he was 
younger and often spoke aboult the climb, and this is what got me into 
mountaineering. It's no walk in the park, but also achievable for anyone 
dedicated to regular training, and I want this software to also enable its 
users to do their training the way they want, independent on their level and 
goals, without having to pay a monthly fee and without having to worry about 
their data. I also want the metrics to be transparent and grounded in science, 
not randomly made up by a vendor without any explanation, as knowing what the 
numbers mean depends on our understanding of them, and just blindly following 
what an app tells you do to is a recipe for missed goals, overtraining and 
frustration. 
